Add EAA blog post (#2581)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: src/posts/2025-01-20-european-accessibility-act.md

---

> title: "European Accessibility Act"

Reviewer: @IdeliaRisella Could you help @zeppelin pick a title? I suggested a few here: https://github.com/mainmatter/mainmatter.com/pull/2581#issuecomment-2612026830 The gist should be: Complying with the EAA requires engineering expertise, Mainmatter can help you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Making Your Web Application Compliant With the European Accessibility Act"
```

Preparing early for these dates is essential to ensure compliance, avoid penalties, and meet market expectations for accessible products.

### Expansion Beyond Web Accessibility

The EAA builds on the Web Accessibility Directive, which originally focused on public sector websites and mobile applications, and extends accessibility requirements to the private sector. This expansion ensures that a broader range of digital and physical products in the private sector adhere to inclusive standards. The EAA’s implementation also benefits from the models and expert groups developed for the Web Accessibility Directive, promoting consistency in enforcement across the EU.

## Meeting compliance requirements

Making sure your business is compliant could be a significant amount of work that also requires a know-how of the field. This section will provide you steps to navigate the problem.

### Automated tooling

Nowadays there’s a plethora of tools to help tackle the a11y requirements. Most popular UI development frameworks such as Ember and Svelte document their solutions and integrations that help with a11y.

> - Code analysis - linting: Allows checking code for missing or misspelled HTML element attributes as the code is developed. It only allows to fix so many issues but they provide the quickest feedback and are the easiest to setup. They can be used as a starting point to accessibility. An example of such a tool is [ember-template-lint](https://github.com/ember-template-lint/ember-template-lint?tab=readme-ov-file).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Code analysis or linting tools that automatically and continuously check the code for missing or invalid HTML element attributes. They are easy to set up and provide quick feedback but are limited to most common issues. They represent a good starting point to making your web products accessible. An example of such a tool is [ember-template-lint](https://github.com/ember-template-lint/ember-template-lint?tab=readme-ov-file).
```

> - Axe-core / e2e testing: Axe-core is a state-of-the-art accessibility analysis tool used by other tools. It provides analysis on a web page, unlike static code analysis, it inspects a web page state directly, providing more and more detailed information. It requires that your tests are able to render individual components or whole web pages for testing. It works well with tools like **Playwright** , **testem** , **storybook** which provide a browser environment for automated testing. An example of such integration is [axe-core/playwright](https://playwright.dev/docs/accessibility-testing).

Reviewer: What does "used by other tools" mean here? I recommend removing or clarifying

Reviewer: This whole paragraph really means: [Axe](https://www.deque.com/axe/) provides excellent accessibility analysis of web pages. By using [axe-core](https://github.com/dequelabs/axe-core), it can integrate with an automated test suite and inspect web pages or individual components according to all sorts of scenarios. For instance, here's an integration with the Playwright test framework: [axe-core/playwright](https://playwright.dev/docs/accessibility-testing).

Author: Replaced the Axe bullet point with your suggestion

### Manual testing

> Manual auditing is required, because automated tools cannot uncover all potential issues, though they can significantly enhance and expedite the process. Elements such as focus management, keyboard behavior, and, most importantly, ensuring that screen readers are provided with correct metadata must be checked manually and evaluated within the broader context of a webpage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although automated tools can significantly streamline the process, they cannot uncover more complex yet common  issues. Complying with the EAA requires some manual auditing. Elements such as focus management, keyboard behavior, and, most importantly, ensuring that screen readers are provided with correct metadata must be checked manually and evaluated within the broader context of a webpage. Some tools can help conduct manual accessibility audits, for instance:
```

- [Axe extension](https://www.deque.com/axe/browser-extensions/): Axe is a browser extension developed by the creators of Axe-core. It allows you to run Axe-core directly in your browser to assist with manual audits. The extension comes in free and paid versions. The free version is sufficient for most needs, while the paid version includes additional features such as a “Guided test,” which provides a checklist and guidance for completing it—although this feature is available for free in another tool we’ll mention later.

> - [Accessibility Insights](https://accessibilityinsights.io/): Accessibility Insights, developed by Microsoft, is a completely free browser extension that may serve as the only tool you need for manual audits. It offers a guided assessment feature to assist you through the process and includes “ad-hoc” tools like “Tab stops,” which visualize where keyboard navigation moves during keyboard accessibility testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Accessibility Insights](https://accessibilityinsights.io/): Accessibility Insights, developed by Microsoft, is a completely free browser extension that may serve as the only tool you need for manual audits. It offers a guided assessment feature to assist you through the process and includes “ad-hoc” tools like “Tab stops” which visualize where keyboard navigation moves during keyboard accessibility testing.
```

### Screen readers

> Keyboard accessibility—the way keyboard navigation behaves—is the minimum requirement that needs to be supported. True accessibility, however, is achieved when a product is fully usable with the help of screen reading technology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keyboard accessibility—the way keyboard navigation behaves—is the minimum requirement that needs to be supported. True accessibility, however, is achieved when a product is fully usable with the help of screen-reading technology.
```

Author: @KevinBongart Ive replaced this with
> The European Accessibility Act is setting the bar for accessibility across the EU, with the June 2025 deadline fast approaching. Achieving compliance isn't just a box to check - it's about creating digital experiences that are accessible to all. But identifying compliance gaps and implementing solutions takes more than just the right tools—it requires experience in building web applications and expertise in web engineering. With years of experience in accessibility and web development, we specialize in identifying and addressing accessibility challenges to ensure your digital products meet the highest standards.

Without going into details, here are some screen readers available across different operating systems:

- [NVDA](https://www.nvaccess.org/download/): A third-party screen reader available for Windows.
- [JAWS](https://www.freedomscientific.com/products/software/jaws/): A commercial screen reader for Windows.
- **VoiceOver**: A built-in screen reader included with macOS.

> - [Orca](https://orca.gnome.org/): A screen reader for Linux systems, specifically those running the GNOME desktop environment.

Reviewer: What is the point of this section? It's just listing screen readers, not showing how Mainmatter can help with accessibility. For instance, it should suggest a screen reader simulator (e.g. https://silktide.com/toolbar/screen-reader-simulator/) for the reader to easily experience their product through such a device. The section should then explain that making web apps work with screen readers take some engineering effort both for identifying gaps and for implementing solutions which depend on the product and the tech stack, and Mainmatter can help with that

Reviewer 2: Nobody that we spoke to or any forums recommends any kind of "simulators" . If they need to they have separate computers or VMs with windows/mac.

Silkitde's "screen simulator" doesn't help here anyway, because it doesn't show a rover (dropdown link selects) or is reading the screen (which is the most important part). It's functionality overlaps with tools recommended in previous sections such as`accessibilityinsights`.

Tl;dr Silktide is not a screen reader. 

Finally, I think that it is helpful to list available screen readers, because I personally had no idea where to get them from and if all systems have it. Turns out all systems have their own solutions.

Author: @KevinBongart @BobrImperator Ping :)

Reviewer: I stand by my comment, this section should serve the purpose of explaining that:

1. Keyboard navigation is the bare minimum, screen reader compatibility is an EAA requirement (right?)
2. Assessing screen reader compatibility requires accessibility expertise and tools, such as hardware screen readers (e.g. NVDA, JAWS…) or software ones (e.g. Silktide)
3. Meeting screen reader compatibility requires deep web engineering expertise that Mainmatter can provide

### Staff training

Accessibility can’t simply be “done”; it must be an ongoing process integrated into the development cycle. Developers need at least a basic understanding of accessibility requirements, their implications, and how specific HTML attributes affect screen readers. Even if an app were to magically transform into an accessible product overnight, it would quickly deteriorate without conscious effort to maintain accessibility during updates. This is why educating teams on accessibility is essential. Articles, how-to guides, and [online courses](https://practical-accessibility.today/) are all great starting points, but accessibility must ultimately become an integral part of the development process—similar to code reviews, for example.

### Costs of compliance

> Ensuring compliance with the European Accessibility Act involves several costs, which depend on the complexity of your web application. The process typically begins with an initial accessibility audit to identify areas requiring updates. Simpler applications may only require one-time investments to implement these updates, while more complex platforms may involve ongoing expenses for development, user testing, and the integration of assistive technologies. Training your team is another important factor, with costs associated with workshops or courses. Additionally, businesses should consider the long-term expenses of ongoing compliance monitoring and enhancing customer support for accessibility. Failing to comply may result in fines ranging from €5,000 to €20,000 _per violation_, with ongoing non-compliance penalties reaching as high as €1,000 per day. While these efforts require investment, the benefits include broader user engagement, reduced legal risks, and a strengthened reputation for inclusivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cost of ensuring compliance with the European Accessibility Act depends on the complexity of your web application. The process typically begins with an initial accessibility audit to identify areas requiring updates. Simpler applications may only require one-time investments to implement these updates, while more complex platforms may involve ongoing expenses for development, user testing, and the integration of assistive technologies. Training your team is another important factor, with costs associated with workshops or courses. Additionally, businesses should consider the long-term expenses of ongoing compliance monitoring and enhancing customer support for accessibility. Failing to comply may result in fines ranging from €5,000 to €20,000 _per violation_, with ongoing non-compliance penalties reaching as high as €1,000 per day. While these efforts require investment, the benefits include broader user engagement, reduced legal risks, and a strengthened reputation for inclusivity.
```

## Quick intro to WCAG 2.2 (Levels A and AA) Success Criteria

> The WCAG 2.2 guidelines establish accessibility standards based on four key principles: **Perceivable**, **Operable**, **Understandable**, and **Robust**. These principles ensure content is accessible to all users, including those with disabilities.

Reviewer: This section comes out of nowhere, with no clear connection with the EAA. I think the EAA is a superset of WCAG, so the bog post should say that and then talk about WCAG. Alternatively, the blog post should have a transition like "Let's look at some specific accessibility criteria from WCAG, which the EAA uses as a technical basis:"

Author: I've added the below between the section title and the WCAG 2.2 paragraph

> Let's look at some specific accessibility criteria from WCAG, which the EAA uses as a technical basis.

- **Content order:** Ensure consistent relative order of navigational elements across pages
- **Consistent identification:** Label elements with similar functions consistently across the site.
- **User-initiated changes:** Warn users of any context changes triggered by their input.
- **Input Assistance:** Help users avoid and correct errors by providing clear labels, descriptive instructions, and accessible error alerts. Detect errors automatically and offer correction suggestions unless security is compromised. For sensitive actions, implement safeguards against accidental submissions.

#### Robust

- **Name, Role, Value:** Ensure that user interface components (like buttons or input fields) are compatible with assistive technologies by making names, roles, states, and properties programmatically accessible. Use ARIA attributes and proper HTML markup to maintain accessibility.
- **Status Messages:** Status updates, such as success messages or alerts, should be communicated to assistive technologies without disrupting the user’s focus. Utilize roles and properties like `role=status` or `role=alert` to achieve this.

## Bottom line

> The European Accessibility Act is setting the bar for accessibility across the EU, with the June 2025 deadline coming up fast. It might seem like a lot to take on, but with the right tools and a little planning, it’s completely doable. Making accessibility a priority now doesn’t just help you avoid penalties—it makes your products better for everyone. So why wait? Let’s get started and make sure your digital experiences are accessible to all.

Reviewer: "with the right tools and a little planning" completely dismisses the pitch from Mainmatter that it takes experience in building web apps to identify accessibility compliance gaps and requires web engineering expertise to implement compliant solutions. This should be rewritten to highlight that Mainmatter has that experience and expertise and we have a contact form to get started with an accessibility audit

Author: @KevinBongart Ive replaced this with

The European Accessibility Act is setting the bar for accessibility across the EU, with the June 2025 deadline fast approaching. Achieving compliance isn't just a box to check - it's about creating digital experiences that are accessible to all. But identifying compliance gaps and implementing solutions takes more than just the right tools—it requires experience in building web applications and expertise in web engineering. With years of experience in accessibility and web development, we specialize in identifying and addressing accessibility challenges to ensure your digital products meet the highest standards.

authorHandle: zeppelin
tags: [process]
bio: "Gabor Babicz, Senior Software Engineering Consultant"
description: "What the European Accessibility Act means for you"
og:
  image: "/assets/images/posts/2025-01-20-european-accessibility-act/og-image.png"
tagline: |
  <p>
    The European Accessibility Act (EAA) is already in effect, and by June 2025, digital products targeting European users must be fully accessible to people with disabilities. If you haven't started planning for compliance, now is the time because non-compliance could cost your business.
  </p>
---

> TL;DR: By June 28, 2025, all digital products and services targeting EU users must meet accessibility standards under the [European Accessibility Act (EAA)](https://employment-social-affairs.ec.europa.eu/policies-and-activities/social-protection-social-inclusion/persons-disabilities/union-equality-strategy-rights-persons-disabilities-2021-2030/european-accessibility-act_en). This includes everything from websites and apps to platforms in sectors like e-commerce, finance, and education. Failing to comply could result in fines of €5,000 to €20,000 per violation, with daily penalties up to €1,000 if issues persist.
>

> > Mainmatter can simplify this process for you. With our expertise, we’ll help ensure your products meet modern accessibility expectations, minimizing legal risks and improving the experience for all your users.

Reviewer 3: This doesn't actually seem to be a quote?

Author: Removed the quote from the paragraph referring to Mainmatter, but kept the quote for the TL;DR, unless you want that, too, to be removed. I was following the style I once published in the Svelte Promise Modals post, maybe that was wrong too, just got published unnoticed

Reviewer 3: If it's a quote, it should use the Markdown quote syntax, if it isn't a quote, it shouldn't use it. If we need extra elements to style certain content in a certain way, @umbrellarocket is the right person to ask for support.

> ## Introduction to the **European Accessibility Act**

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest a more concise and to-the-point writing style – not just here but in general:

```suggestion
## What is the **European Accessibility Act**?
```

The **[European Accessibility Act (EAA)](https://employment-social-affairs.ec.europa.eu/policies-and-activities/social-protection-social-inclusion/persons-disabilities/union-equality-strategy-rights-persons-disabilities-2021-2030/european-accessibility-act_en)** is a directive designed to ensure digital accessibility across the European Union, covering websites, mobile applications, software, and other digital and physical products used in sectors like e-commerce, finance, education, and transportation. By establishing unified accessibility standards, the EAA simplifies compliance for businesses operating in multiple regions, eliminating the need to navigate varying national regulations. This harmonization reduces compliance costs, expands market opportunities, and enhances digital experiences for people with disabilities and elderly individuals.

> Non-compliance with the EAA can lead to significant consequences, including fines and potential lawsuits. Businesses risk legal action, especially if their products or services are essential yet inaccessible. To mitigate these risks, organizations should prioritize accessibility by conducting regular audits, maintaining thorough reporting, and creating a knowledge base for customer support. By integrating accessibility into their strategy, businesses not only reduce liabilities but also foster a more inclusive user experience.

Reviewer 3: No offense to anyone but this sounds like it's either copy-pasted from the EU website or completely written by Chat-GPT – I assume we can say all of this with 2-3 to-the-point sentences as well?

Author: Does the below sound better?

> The **[European Accessibility Act (EAA)](https://employment-social-affairs.ec.europa.eu/policies-and-activities/social-protection-social-inclusion/persons-disabilities/union-equality-strategy-rights-persons-disabilities-2021-2030/european-accessibility-act_en)** sets digital accessibility standards across the EU, covering websites, apps, software, and other products in sectors like e-commerce, finance, education, and transportation. By standardizing requirements, the EAA makes compliance easier for businesses operating in multiple countries, reducing costs and opening up market opportunities. It also improves digital access for people with disabilities and older adults.
> 
> Failing to comply can lead to fines and legal action, especially if essential services remain inaccessible. To stay compliant, businesses should conduct regular audits, maintain detailed records, and build accessibility into customer support. Prioritizing accessibility not only reduces legal risks but also creates a better experience for all users.

Reviewer 3: It's still copy/paste from an EU website/written by Chat-GPT? Don't we just want to say the EU requires accessibility which helps ensure digital things are accessible and it enforces particular standards (see below – we need to add what specifically those standards mean)

### Compliance Timeline

> Product owners need to be aware of these key deadlines:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Product teams need to be aware of these key deadlines:
```

I'd avoid Scrum jargon in general .)

Author: Didn't mean to refer to Scrum, wanted to refer to business owners in general, specific to products. Updated as per your suggestion, nonetheless

- **June 28, 2025**: Deadline for most digital platforms (websites, mobile apps) and other covered products to comply with EAA accessibility standards.

> - **June 28, 2030**: Extended compliance deadline for certain self-service terminals, such as ATMs and ticket machines.

Reviewer 3: Is this indeed something that teams need to prioritize now?

Author: Not sure I understand the question

Reviewer 3: Do teams need to prioritize working towards meeting a regulation that will be binding in 5y now?

> Preparing early for these dates is essential to ensure compliance, avoid penalties, and meet market expectations for accessible products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's focus on the first deadline, June 28, 2025, which is the most immediate one and the one that most likely applies to you. Is is essential to prepare for it so as to ensure compliance, avoid penalties, and meet market expectations for accessible products.
```

### Expansion Beyond Web Accessibility

> The EAA builds on the Web Accessibility Directive, which originally focused on public sector websites and mobile applications, and extends accessibility requirements to the private sector. This expansion ensures that a broader range of digital and physical products in the private sector adhere to inclusive standards. The EAA’s implementation also benefits from the models and expert groups developed for the Web Accessibility Directive, promoting consistency in enforcement across the EU.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what this adds to the post tbh…

Author: Removed

## Meeting compliance requirements

> Making sure your business is compliant could be a significant amount of product design and engineering work that also requires a know-how of the web application development field. This section will provide you steps to navigate the problem.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ensuring compliance with the EAA requires product design and engineering work. This section shows the key steps.
```

sounds much more natural?

### Costs of compliance

The cost of ensuring compliance with the European Accessibility Act depends on the complexity of your web application. The process typically begins with an initial accessibility audit to identify areas requiring updates. Simpler applications may only require one-time investments to implement these updates, while more complex platforms may involve ongoing expenses for development, user testing, and the integration of assistive technologies. Training your team is another important factor, with costs associated with workshops or courses. Additionally, businesses should consider the long-term expenses of ongoing compliance monitoring and enhancing customer support for accessibility. Failing to comply may result in fines ranging from €5,000 to €20,000 _per violation_, with ongoing non-compliance penalties reaching as high as €1,000 per day. While these efforts require investment, the benefits include broader user engagement, reduced legal risks, and a strengthened reputation for inclusivity.

> ## Quick intro to WCAG 2.2 (Levels A and AA) Success Criteria

Reviewer 3: Can this be moved to the top to explain what specifically the EAA is about? Until this point I was wondering what specifically a web app needs to do to be compliant and it seemed like that might not be covered in the post since it was already talking about tools…

Author: Done
- Renamed to just "Success Criteria"
- Moved just below "Meeting compliance requirements"
